---
layout: post
title: "[bitácora #2] cultural translation"
subtitle: "ship's log. entry #2. version 1.1."
post_type: "post"
permalink: /bitacora/2

header-img: "img/posts/bitacora/entry-02_header.webp"
header-mask: 0.45

categories:
  - bitacora
tags:
  - bitacora
---

> **[cuaderno de] bitácora** (ship's log)
> <br>
> **1.** (nautical) book in which ship's crew members record course, speed, maneuvers, and other navigation phenomena.

Thoughts about translation and reinterpretation of culture,
in whatever form, shape, color or smell, if necessary.


## saturday, 05.07.2025

There's a sort of catharsis going on when you _see_ (physicaly see,
in front of you), some thing or (even better) place you've experienced
in fiction.

A whole new layer of meaning pops out of the blue. Both, reality and
fiction, gain an extra dimension.


## wednesday, 18.06.2025

I've just learned that [_Catherine_](https://store.steampowered.com/agecheck/app/893180)
was a test project for [_Persona 5_](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1687950/Persona_5_Royal/),
that just got bigger that expected and ended up becoming a game
by its own.

And now some things about those game suddenly connect and make
much more sense.

It's interesting, though, how games allow to make "first steps"
that have nothing to do -in an _artistic_ manner- with the end
goal, as the objective is to test the technology.

I guess that happens in other tech-heavy media, like cinema
(specially animation), but I just find kinda funny how stuff
like this can remind you how much _tools_ matter in our medium.


## friday, 14.03.2025

Humans prefering to deal with a month 28 days long, and counting
every four years to add an extra day, is the best live example of
why legacy code exists.


## tuesday, 04.02.2025

I don't like the concept of _gamification_ as it's been
popularized —mostly coming from people who don't have any
kind of game design related knowledge.

Almost the entire concept of "gamifying" something is
centered around the process of dividing that _something_ into
tasks, assign those tasks some arbitrary score, and give
people a fancy badge once they're successfull enough —whatever
that might mean—. Maybe with some sort of leaderboard too, so
people can get competitive with other "players".

For hell's sake, games didn't invent any of those things.

Games —specially video games- took those concepts and
structures from a much more established source. In the
attempt of making _Fun_ systemic, video games shamelessly
copied all that stuff from... (drumroll) Military services!

So... when _gamification_ tries to copy its pilars from
an interpreter, instead of the original source —which,
I bet, they're unaware about-, it's only logic that
everything gets lost in translation.